Pointers are very powerful
constructs in programming languages.
However, there are some potential
pitfalls that you should be
aware of when using pointers.
In this video, we'll go
over some of those pitfalls.
These include using uninitialized
pointers, dangling or stray
pointers, not checking if new
allocated memory and leaking memory.
First, let's look at
uninitialized pointers.
We've seen these already, but let's
talk about them one more time.
Uninitialized pointers
contain garbage, which means
they could point anywhere.
If we try to access or modify the
data they're pointing to, we could
run into some major problems.
The pointer might be pointing
to a very important area in
memory, and we could wipe it out.
Modern operating systems today
are pretty good at protecting
critical areas of system memory,
but you could still trash an area
important to your program that
could cause your program to crash.
Worst-case scenario is that the
program continues to work as
expected for a long time since
the memory access isn't used.
Then an update to your program later
on changes everything, and all of
a sudden the program is crashing.
You think it's because of the new
change, but it's actually a bug that's
been in the code for a long time.
In the old days of computing,
it wasn't uncommon to corrupt
data on storage devices by
using uninitialized pointers.
Another potential problem
with pointers is the dangling
pointer, sometimes called
wild or stray pointers.
These are pointers that are pointing
to memory that's no longer valid.
If you try to use these pointers
to access that data, you don't
know what the results will be.
The main reasons for dangling
pointers are returning addresses
of function local variables on
the stack that are no longer valid
since the function is terminated.
Another common scenario is that you
allocate storage dynamically and
assign it to a pointer variable, then
you assign another pointer variable
to point to that same storage.
Now you have two pointers pointing
to the same area on the heap.
That's okay, and we
do it all the time.
The problem comes in when one of
the pointers releases the memory
but the other pointer is still
referencing to it and you use it.
Again, unpredictable
results can happen.
Best case is your program
crashes during development
and you fix these errors.
The next pointer pitfall is not
checking to see if new failed.
If new fails to allocate
storage an exception is thrown
in your program terminates.
We can use exception handling
to get more fine-grained control
over these exceptional situations.
If you try to de-reference a
pointer which is pointing to
null, your program would crash.
This is good in testing
but not good in production.
The last pointer pitfall we'll
discuss is the memory leak.
This is probably right up there with
the uninitialized pointer as the most
common type of pointer-related error.
Memory leaks are easy to understand.
When you allocate storage dynamically
on the heap, this storage has no name.
It's simply an area of memory
that's returned to you and you
stored the value in the pointer.
The only way to get to this
memory is through the pointer.
But what if you lose the pointer, say
you allocated the memory in a function
and the pointer was declared in the
function and the function terminates.
Now you just lost your pointer.
There's no way you can reference
that allocated memory on the heap.
This memory is still
considered in use by c++.
So this is called a memory leak.
If you leak enough memory, you
could run out of storage on the
heap for future allocations.
Memory leaks used to be much
more problematic when memory
was limited, but there's still
an error in a sign of bad code.
As you can see, the potential
problems are well understood.
And as you become more
experienced with pointers, you
become very aware of them, and
you don't make these mistakes.
Now that I've mentioned the pitfalls
with using raw c++ pointers, c++
has smart pointers now that take
care of many of these problems
and are still very efficient.
They're a more advanced topic,
and it's something that you
should learn as you become
more proficient with c++.
I'll revisit smart pointers in
the context of object-oriented
programming in the next section.
Well, that wraps up c++ pointers.
I hope I did a good job
explaining them since they
can be very intimidating.
Please let me know if
you have any questions.
Practice with pointers, write simple
programs, print out the values of the
pointers so you can understand how
to work with them and with memory.
Okay, now let's move on to references.